=head1 NAME

fapi - A humble command line tool to manage F5 BigIP loadbalancers

=head1 SYNOPSIS

Just run

  fapi -h

or

  alias f=fapi
  f -h

because it's shorter to type.

=head1 ABOUT

This is a simple command line client to do basic stuff with the iControl F5 API 
such as:

  Managing Monitors
  Managing Nodes
  Managing Pools
  Managing Virtual Servers

And some extended usage:

  Managing Folders
  Managing Self IPs
  Managing Traffic Groups
  Managing VLANs


This is a private programming project programmed in my spare time. Therefore I
didn't bother to put it on a public website and github. Please open bug 
reports, feature requests and pull requests at
L<https://codeberg.org/snonux/fapi>. 

B<CAUTION: This script has been tested on Debian GNU/Linux Wheezy only.>

=head1 BIGSUDS

=head2 Requirement of bigsuds

This tool depends on bigsuds. Please install this library from F5 dev central
manually. Otherwise this script will not work.

You can download bigsuds from here:

L<https://devcentral.f5.com/d/bigsuds-python-icontrol-library>

Unzip it and run

  sudo python setup.py install

You may also install bigsuds from the contrib dir of the fapi source tree.

=head2 iControl reference

Through bigsuds you can do everything what iControl can do:

L<https://devcentral.f5.com/wiki/icontrol.apireference.ashx>


=head1 QUICK START

Update your sources list:

  curl http://deb.buetow.org/apt/pubkey.gpg | sudo apt-key add -
  echo deb http://deb.buetow.org/apt wheezy main |
    sudo tee /etc/apt/sourcees.list.d/buetoworg.list
  sudo aptitude update

And run

  sudo aptitude install fapi
  cp /usr/share/fapi/fapi.conf.sample ~/.fapi.conf
  vim ~/.fapi.conf

Or if you want to install it from the source dir, just run:

  make
  sudo make install

=head1 EXAMPLES

=head2 Listing

If you want to list all configured objects on your partition just run

  fapi node # To list all nodes
  fapi pool # To list all pool
  ... # etc

=head2 Setting up a simple pool

  # Creating two nodes, fapi auto resolves the IP addresses, and use the
  # FQDN as the node name. 
  fapi node fooserver1.example.com create
  fapi node fooserver2.example.com create

  # Creating a pool and add the nodes to it. Also specify the node ports to 
  # use by the monitors (and maybe PAT if enabled)
  fapi pool foopool create
  fapi pool foopool add member fooserver1.example.com:80
  fapi pool foopool add member fooserver2.example.com:80

  # Add a monitor to the pool
  fapi pool foopool add monitor http_lbtest

=head2 Setting up a simple nPath Service

A simple nPath service can be created as follows.

  fapi vserver myvserver.example.com:80 create PROTOCOL_TCP nPath
  fapi vserver myvserver.example.com:80 set pool foopool

  # Restrict the vservers to a specific VLAN (IMPORTANT! security
  # hole otherwise!)
  fapi vserver myvserver.example.com:80 set vlan VLANNAME
  fapi vserver myvserver.example.com:443 set vlan VLANNAME

  # Put the VirtualAddress of the vserver into a specific traffic group
  fapi vip myserver.example.com set tgroup some-traffic-group

And everything can be deleted as folows:

  # You can also specify the full object name (including the partition)
  fapi vserver /Common/myvserver.example.com_80 delete

  # Or just the way the service was created from command line
  fapi vserver myvserver.example.com:443 delete

  fapi pool foopool delete
  fapi node fooserver1.example.com delete
  fapi node fooserver2.example.com delete

=head2 Setting up simple HTTP NAT Services

A simple HTTP NATed service can be created as follows.

  fapi vserver myvserver.example.com:80 create PROTOCOL_TCP http
  fapi vserver myvserver.example.com:80 set vlan VLANNAME
  fapi vserver myvserver.example.com:80 set pool foopool

In order to make this work your application servers need to have setup a
default route to the loadbalancers floating self IP.

=head2 Setting up simple SNAT Services

Same as setting up a NATed services, but you don't need to configure default 
routes from your application servers to the loadbalancers floating self IP.

You need also to set the SNAT flag as follows:

  fapi vserver myvserver.example.com:80 set snat automap

=head2 Settung up simple SNAT Services with SSL offloading enabled

Just like SNAT service (use port 443) but with these additional steps

First Upload the SSL certificate to the F5 BIG IP (e.g. System -> File Management
-> SSL Certificate List on BIG IP V11.4). 

  # Afterwards create a new SSL profile to use the new certificate:
  # (Will automatically use key/crt myserver.example.com.{key,crt})
  fapi profileclientssl myserver.example.com create

  # Then attach that profile to the vserver (default context is 
  # PROFILE_TYPE_CLIENT_SSL, which means SSL between F5 and Clients)
  fapi vserver myvserver.example.com:443 profile add myserver.example.com

=head2 About the NAME argument

In most cases NAME can be a hostname, FQDN or an IP address. Optionally folled
by a port:

  NAME := fqdn|hostname|ip[:ip2[:port]]

Examples:

  # Auto resolving of the virtual address (IP) and auto port 80. The vserver
  # name will have added an automatic _PORT suffix to it's name.
  fapi vserver fqdn.example.com create

  # Or just ignore the auto port, will not add any _PORT suffix to the 
  # vserver name.
  fapi -a ....

  # Example:
  fapi -a vserver fqdn.example.com_ssl create

  # Auto resolving of the virtual address (IP)
  fapi vserver fqdn.example.com:443 create

  # Auto resolving of the FQDN (vserver name) and the virtual address (IP) 
  # and auto port 80
  fapi vserver hostname create

  # Auto resolving of the FQDN (vserver name) and the virtual address (IP) 
  fapi vserver hostname:443 create

  # vserver name and its virtual address will be 1.2.3.4 and auto port 80
  fapi vserver 1.2.3.4 create

  # vserver name and its virtual address will be 1.2.3.4 
  fapi vserver 1.2.3.4:443 create

  # vserver name is foo, its virtual address 1.2.3.4 and port is 80
  fapi vserver foo:1.2.3.4:80 create

  # vserver name is 1.2.3.5, its virtual address 1.2.3.4 and port is 80
  fapi vserver 1.2.3.5:1.2.3.4:80 create


Similar may apply to other object types such as nodes and vips.

=head1 AUTHOR

Paul C. Buetow - <paul@buetow.org>

Also see L<http://fapi.buetow.org>

=cut
